"Get a Straight Answer"
International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) Historical Pages
Disclaimer: The following material is being kept online for archival purposes.
Although accurate at the time of publication, it is no longer being updated. The page may contain broken links or outdated information, and parts may not function in current web browsers.
Site Map
Get a Straight Answer
Please note!
Listed below are questions submitted by users of "From Stargazers to Starships" and the answers given to them.
This is just a selection--
of the many questions that arrive, only a few are listed.  The ones included below are
either
of the sort that keeps coming up again and again,
or else
the answers make a special point, often going into details which might interest many users.
For a complete list, including later questions not listed below,
click here
.
You may also
link from here
to a listing of questions
arranged by topic
.
About asteroids hitting Earth.
The swirling of water in a draining tub.
Dispensing water at zero-g.
Robert Goddard and World War II.
Asymmetry of the Moon's orbit.
Measuring distance from the Sun.
Who owns the Moon?
Acceleration of a rocket.
Rebounding ping pong balls (re. #35)
Rebounding ping pong balls and gravity-assist
Why don't we feel the Sun's gravity pull?
How hot are red, white and blue (etc.) stars?
How does the solar wind move?
The shape of the orbit of Mars
What if the Earth's axis were tilted 90° to the ecliptic?
Mars and Venus
Where is the boundary between summer and winter?
The Ozone Hole
What keeps the Sun from blowing up?
Those glorious Southern Skies!
Should we fear big solar outbursts?
Planetary line-up and the sunspot cycle
What are comet tails made of?
If light speed sets the limit, why fly into space?
Does precession mis-align ancient monuments?
Why does the Earth rotate? Why is it a sphere?
What's so hard about reaching the Sun?
Where does space begin?
Gravity at the Earth's Center
Radiation hazard in space (3 queries)
"Danger, falling satellites"?
The Lagrangian L3 point
Distance to the Horizon on an Asteroid
Overtaking Planets
Falling Towards the Sun
The Polar Bear
Are the Sun's Rays Parallel?
More thrust in reverse than going forward?
The varying distance between Earth and Sun
Mission to Mars
Kepler's calculation
The Appearance (Phase) of the Moon
Stability of Lagrangian points
Can an Asteroid Impact Change the Earth's Orbit?
Can Gravity Increase with Depth?
Lightspeed, Hyperspace and Wormholes
Why do Rockets Spin?
Around What does the Sun Revolve?
Why are planets in nearly the same plane?
The Shapes of Rockets and Spacecraft
Space Debris
Teaching Nuclear Fusion
Contribution of different elements to Sunlight
Jewish Calendar
Spaceflight Without Escape Velocity?
Who first proposed a round Earth?
Does Precession change the Length of a Year?
The Analemma
Changes of the Polar Axis of Earth
Van Allen Belt and Spaceflight
Nearest Star Outside Our Galaxy
(a) Why are Satellites Launched Eastward?
What is a "Sun Synchronous" orbit?
(b) Why are satellites launched from near the equator?
How Tall Can People Get?
Gunpowder and Rockets
Precession
Solar Sails
(a) Distance to the Big Dipper
(b) Big Dipper star names
Was Moon landing a hoax?
Clockwise or counter-clockwise?
Isotopes in Center of Earth
Density of the Sun's corona and the "Scale Height"
Did Tesla extract free energy from thin air?
What does "lapse rate" mean?
Motion of the Sun through space
Teaching about tides
Distance to the Horizon
Can  geocentrist theory still be possible?
Can Earth's rotation reverse, like its magnetic polarity?
Why  is the Earth round?
The De Laval Nozzle
Why 23.5 degrees?
What is Gravitational Collapse?
Can Earth capture a second moon?
How far does the Earth's gravity extend?
How far is the Moon?
Twinkle, twinkle little star--
How I wonder, what you are.
Teaching about seasons
Space Launches by Cannon--A
Space Launches by Cannon--B
The Southern Pole of the Sky
Do Astrologers use Wrong Positions for Planets?
Why does the Moon have bigger craters?
Why does Gravity Exist?
Atmospheric "Thermals"--Triggered by Electric Forces?
What would happen if Earth rotated faster?
Where do gravity of Earth and Sun balance?
The Ultimate Astronomy Tool
High Temperature in Cold Outer Space
Refraction of sunlight and starlight by the atmosphere
Advice to a would-be astronomer
The effect of the Color of Light on the Output of Solar Cells
What is "radiation"?
Height of the Atmosphere
How does the upper atmosphere get so hot?
History of the use of De Laval's nozzle on rockets
Why don't Space Rockets use Wings?
Distance of horizon on Mars
Stopping the rotation of Earth?
The equation of a parabola
When does Jewish Sabbath start in the far north?
Where is the center of the global landmass?
What if our Sun was a much hotter star?
Finding the north direction
Why not use a heat shield going up?
When and where can rainbows be seen?
The unusual rotation of the planet Venus
Why not use nuclear power for spaceflight?
"Doesn't heat rise?"
Have any changes been observed on the Moon?
Why isn't our atmosphere flung off by the Earth's rotation?
Can kinetic energy be reconverted to work?
Does any location get the same number of sunshine hours per year?
Speed of toy car rolling off an inclined ramp
Acceleration due to gravity
Re-entry from Space
Balancing a Bicycle
Is Absolute Zero reached on the Moon?
Why isn't Longitude measured from 0° to 360°?
"Constellation" or "Asterism"?
"Position of the Stars when I was Born"
Rotation of the Earth's Core"
How hot is the Sun?
How much weaker is gravity higher up?
Eclipse of Venus?
The Big Bang
Thanks for the "Math Refresher" in Spanish
The Pressure of Sunlight
How is the instant the seasons change determined?
Operation of Ion Rockets
Physical Librations of the Moon
The De-Laval Nozzle
Why does the space shuttle rotate at take-off?
Cold Fusion
What if a Neutron Star hit the Sun?
Why did the Moon appear Red?
Centrifuge for Whirling Astronauts
What Holds Galaxies Together?
View of Earth and Moon from Mars
Appearance of the Moon (1)
Appearance of the Moon (2): Does it "roll around"?
Altitude of the tail of the Big Dipper
Sudden decompression, 5 miles up
Do Negative Ions make you Feel Good?
Shape of the Earth's Orbit
Questions about the Solar Corona:
(1) Why don't its particles separate by weight?
(2) What accelerates the solar wind?
Why does the rising Sun look so big?
Drawing a Perpendicular Line in Rectangular Coordinates
Unequal Seasons
Is the Big Dipper visible from Viet Nam?
Holes in a Solar Sail
Consequences of no more solar X-rays
Science Fair Project on the Size of the Earth
Superposition of Waves
The Sun and Seasons
If the Earth's Rotation would
S t o p
...
(1)
If the Earth's Rotation would
C h a n g e
...
(2)
What if the Earth stopped in its orbit?
Fast Trip to Mars
(1)
Fast Trip to Mars
(2)
Spacecraft Attitude
What makes the Earth rotate?
Energy from the Earth's Rotation?
How were planets created?
Does Precession of the Equinoxes shift our Seasons?
"Zenial Days" on Hawaii
Sun's Temperature and Energy Density of Sunlight
Teaching about energy in 8th grade
About the jetstream
What would a breach in a space station do?
Gravity at the Earth's center
Freak waves on the ocean
Citation on "Bad Greenhouse" web page
How can radio waves carry sound?
Do Cosmic Rays produce lightning?
Star positions shifted by the atmosphere
The equation of time
Launch window of the Space Shuttle
No "Man in the Moon" from Australia?
Picturing the Sun from a different distance
What makes the sun shine so brightly?
Re-entry from orbit
Effects of weightlessness on one's body
Blimps on Mars
Planet Mars "huge" in the sky, in August 2005?
Astronomy and telescopes for ones' own children
Does the solar wind have escape velocity
Astronomy for cliff-dwellers of New York City
Portable star finder
What if the Moon was closer? (2 questions)
Why doesn't the Moon have an atmosphere?
Telling a 3-year old about the atmosphere  (2 questions)
Three-color vision
Superconductors work, universe expands--with no energy input. Why?
Shuttle orbit and Earth rotation
Worrying about Wormholes and Black Holes
What should I study?
The greenhouse effect
Separation between lines of latitude and longitude
Motion of air: hot to cold, or high pressure to low?
Removing "Killer Asteroids"
Strange light seen from Hawaii
Is the Sun attached to another star?
What if the Sun turned into a black hole?
Do absorption lines have a Doppler shift?
What are "Electromagnetic Waves"?
Why are the two daily tides unequal?
Why air gets cold higher up--a wrong explanation
Any limits to Newton's 2nd Law
Gravity at the Earth's center
Does the Earth follow a "squiggly" orbit?
Third grader asks: how far to zero gravity?
"How does inertia affect a rolling ball"?
What determines the quality of a telescope?
Why design maps around curved lines?
"Drag" by the Sun on the Earth's motion
Does precession affect the time of summer?
(2 questions)
Newton's law or Bernoulli's?
Does the universe have an axis?
Frictional electricity
Syllabus for catching up on physics
Parabolic reflector
At what distance does Earth start looking spherical?
Is the Sun on fire?
Confusion about the "Big Bang"
How did Tycho calibrate his instruments?
Gases that fill balloons
Asian tradition on the start of winter
Why our year starts at January 1
Sticking a hand out of a window...
One year of continuous sunlight?
Shielding out radio waves
The way gravity changes with depth
The Sun's Axis
"Gravity Particles"?
A "short stay on Mars"
Weight and mass
"The Moon Hoax"
Shuttle re-entry from space
Energy levels: plus or minus?
How can such small targets be accurately hit
so far away?
A teacher asks about compiling lesson plans
Why the Moon has its phases
How can a spacecraft self-rotate?
Stability during a rocket launch
Boiling point of water in space
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky
The Color Indigo
Electromagnetic Waves and Electromagnetic Induction
Why do orbits curve?
The "Sundial Bridge" in Redding
(a) Temperature in space
(b) Exposure to the space environment: Freeze or burn?
Remote sensing of Thunderstorms
What keeps Electrons away from the Atomic Nucleus?
The Stars on the Winter Solstice of 2012
Mars Sunset
Gravity at the Center of Earth
The Big Bang
"How Often are Stars Born?"
The Path of Lightning
Launching a Rocket from an Airplane
The Equation of Continuity
The Four Corners Monument
Which among the brightest stars is closest to N Pole?
Gravity Assist
Is the Centrifugal Force "Real"?
How do we know Earth is bigger than the Moon?
Sound Waves on the Sun?
What if we had to give up use of Satellites?
Rotation of Venus
"Proper Motion" of Stars
Doppler Shift from the Big Bang
Science Fiction scenario for a Flight to Mars
Motion of the Moon
"Iridium" flares
Discovering Planets outside the Solar System
Landing speed of airplane
The Hubble Constant
Are Summer Nights Darker?
"Space Elevator"
Black Holes
291a.
Angle between ecliptic and Milky Way
291b.
(Continuation)--About the year 2012
Don't use Diesel fuel in a gasoline car!
How bright is our Sun when seen from space?
What is a "field"?
Outer limits of the Solar System
Gravitational Energy
Stresses on a Railroad Bridge
The constellation of Cassiopeia
Tracking of radioactivity carried by winds
Why can't the space shuttle reenter "slowly"?
"The Standard Model of the Universe"
About the Maya Calendar
Are light sabers possible?
Can the heat of sunshine make the Earth expand?
About Mountains
"Will the World end in 2012?"
(a,b)
Advice to graduating High School Student
Could a (heat resistant!) ship float on the Sun?
Reducing the fuel weight of the Space Shuttle?
How do Rockets Land?
The Earth's Spin reduced by Global Warming
Circumnavigation of the Sun
Are nuclear forces merely gravity at very close distance?
Changing the Earth's Rotation
Why are planetary orbits eccentric?
Forces on Comet-dwellers
Nuclear reactors and bombs
Why doesn't magnetism affect electro-magnetic waves?
Is humanity changing the climate, or is it the Sun and the Earth's magnetism?
Advice to home-schooling parent
Science of Clothing
Calculating a Collision
The Coriolis force and more
Why isn't the solar system stratified by density?
Tapping Atmospheric Electricity
Global Disaster in 2012?
What's the difference between speed and velocity?
Effect of Gravity on Electromagnetic Waves
Why is North the reference, not South?
The lowest 700 km of our Atmosphere
Doomsday 2012?
Where does a Flying Bird get its Support?
Why does Sun seem to move?
Why don't waves disturb each other?
Does the Moon's motion Change?
Big Dipper and Weather
What IS the Ecliptic?
Precession, Greenhouse and more...
Latest Sunrise, Earliest Sunset
Falling off the Earth's Bottom?
Rolling down a slopea>
Pelton Wheel Efficiency
Energy loss rate of our Sun
The Sun's distance
Why does sunlight have a continuous spectrum?
Harry Paul Sprain's perpetual Motion Device
Can the plasma that fills space help spaceflight?
Spiral arms of our galaxy
What powers a glider?
UFOs
Maximum speed for propeller-driven airplane?
The speed at which gravity spreads
Layers of the Earth
Why doesn't the sky fall on us?
Imagine a non-rotating Earth
Flying east with a 1° error
US Flag on the Moon
Rope stretched across a long lake...
About studying electronics in the USA
Publish
Stargazers
as a book?
Charging of Earth by lightning:    +   or   –  ?
If no stars were seen--could Earth's orbital motion be discovered?
Local Solar Time in Iceland
Is orbital motion same as free fall?
Build a straight tower in warped space?
The 2011-2 sunspot maximum
Is Earth adding mass?
Shape of a "bottle rocket"
Fantasy spaceflight vs. reality
Telling a 7-year old about stars "dying"
(1) Why is lightning jagged?     (2) What did Tesla do?
How can the north wall of my house be in sunlight?
Heating the inside of Earth
Dawning of the Age of Aquarius
Why is hydrogen the fuel of choice?
Gamma ray bursts
Counter-clockwise swirling motion in the atmosphere
Leap years on the Jewish calendar
Earth axis tilt and climate (1)
Earth axis tilt and climate (2)
Does the Sun move?
Can the Sun interfere with the visibility of the Big Dipper?
Why can't we feel the Earth's rotation?
Is our galaxy held together by a central black hole?
Why don't gas planets just evaporate?
Source of the Sun's energy
Point of gravity equilibrium
Solar system motion through the Galaxy
Spaceflight by waiting for the Earth to turn?
Does Earth rotation affect size of creatures?
The year 2012
Are our galactic arms winding up or opening up?
Advice to a home-schooling mother
Are all stars we see suns?
Newton's 3rd law
396A
Posssibility of Asteroid Hitting Earth (1)
396B
Posssibility of Asteroid Hitting Earth (2)
Author's IQ
Global Warming caused by Sun getting nearer?
The year 2012
Empty space behind North Star?
The year 2012 and the 26,000 year cycle
"Quarter Squares"
Do Rockets need "something to push against"?
Sunrise-Sunset asymmetry
Re-entry from orbit
Earth Axis and Gravity
The year 2012
Choosing an Aerospace Career
Advice for "new" physics teacher
Paradox of Time Travel
Is 7th grade Earth science boring?
Air Resistance
Experimenting with Microwave Oven
Is the Sun losing mass?
Sun's position at noon, south of equator
Fred Hoyle's theory of the Sun's Corona
Why don't Protons and Electrons combine?
Days in a Year
Position of the Moon in the sky
Earth crossing Galactic Equator?
Is the geocentric theory ruled out?
Does the Southern Sky have a Pole Star?
What is the fate of starlight energy?
Double-slit diffraction of particles
Does the Sun overhead reduce effective weight?
Evidence for Global Warming ?
Distances to the Equator
Weight on the Equator and at the Pole
Why doesn't gravity overcome buoyancy?
The Prime Meridian
Is L2 in the Earth's Shadow?
In what direction is Israel from NY?
Is the World Overpopulated?
Magnetic Energy
Magnetic Carnot Cycle
Defining the Equator
Second Moon for Earth?
The year 2012 and a distant companion of our Sun
Distance between two points on a sphere
Getting sucked I by Gravity
The work of Nikola Tesla
Firing a cannon straight up
Does one see half the sky--or more, or less?
Why are nights dark?
The origin of the Solar System
Flying to other planets
The heat of the Sun's corona
Crossing our galaxy's equator
Newton's 3rd law--in statics and dynamics
Barycenter of Earth-Moon system
What if Earth rotated in only 10 hours>
If you have a relevant question of your own, you can send it to
stargaze
["at" symbol]
phy6.org
Before you do, though, please read the
instructions
1.    About asteroids hitting Earth
A friend asked if I could find anything on an asteroid heading
for earth & a laser that supposedly is in space that will eliminate the
asteroid before it hits earth.  Is there any such thing, or is he
reading too many sci-fi books?
Reply
About asteroids heading for Earth: the best account I know is a section
"The Shoemaker Comets" in the book "First Light" by Richard Preston. As
for lasers capable of destroying one, they are (at least right now) pure
sci-fi.
The above book makes an interesting point: it would be very hard to spot
an asteroid heading for Earth. Astreroids are usually detected in photographs of the sky (via a telescope) by the fact they move across the line
of sight, leaving a streak rather than a spot. If they move across the
line of sight, they are not going to hit Earth; if they are heading
straight for Earth, they leave no streak and attract no notice.
2.   
The swirling of water in a draining tub
I am a grandmother, soon to be 55 years old,
who often gets into heated arguments in her maillists!  My question, to
avoid the argument by having facts, is: The direction of draining water in
the tub, sink and toilet is said to be the opposite in Australia. Someone
said the Coriolis Effect governs this, and it is a myth. Someone said the
CE has nothing to do with it, and it is a myth. Then again someone said it
is NOT a myth. I am on the fence with this one, as I cannot argue something
I do not have one idea about!! Can you help me? Thanks in advance!
Reply
Your first respondent was right: the Coriolis effect governs it, and
it is a myth. The Coriolis effect can govern the swirling of fluid
flows, and where it does, the swirling is opposite in opposite hemispheres.
However, it is only appreciable on a very large scale. Hurricanes obey
it: tornadoes, which are much smallers, do not, and neither do kitchen sinks, which are much smaller still.
For details and explanations, look up on the world-wide web
here
.
3.     Dispensing water at zero-g.
I am a student currently studying for a degree in engineering. As part of this degree we have been
given the task of designing a water heater and dispenser for use in zero
gravity. It has been suggested to use a bladder in a
pressurized container heated using microwave or Radio Frequency
technology. The heater must heat approximately 100 ml to 80 degrees
celsius, and the entire system can use no more than 12 volts. How would
you suggest a layout for this type of system might look? Any information
that you could provide would be most appreciated.
Reply
Our research group is concerned with plasmas and magnetic fields in the rarefied medium between here and the Sun. We have no expertise at all in zero-g and space-station hardware.
This does not stop me from speculating about your request, of course.
The key word is "dispensing": what do you mean by that? You cannot
just have a tap and let out the hot water--it will form globs that
drift away in zero-g and ultimately contaminate your circuitry or
mess up your living quarters.
So you need three elements--a container where the water is heated,
a tank from which the water is obtained and a container for the hot
tea or whatever you want to make with the water.
The first and third may well be plastic bladders, whose volume can
adjust. The reservoir would have an outer bladder with water only and
and inner bladder filled with air, and as the astronaut with a squeeze-bulb pumps air into the inner bladder, water is squeezed out.
The heating vessel--you could use RF heating, but I suspect it
will be somewhat heavy, will need stepping up the voltage from 12 volt
and also will have to be shielded from radiating. In an environment
where every superfluous gram costs a great deal, wouldn't a simple
resistive heating element--with a thermostat, of course--be simpler?
It could be in a cylindrical container with a spring loaded piston
which is initially at the bottom. When refilling it from the reservoir
the water enters from below and pushes the piston up, against a ratchet,
and when the astronaut wants a drink, he or she releases the ratchet and
the spring loaded piston pushes the water out, into the third container.
 The trick is to never mix any air with the water--once they are
together, they are hard to separate.
This opinion comes to you with no warranty by NASA or anyone.
Have fun! Now, let me go back to serious work...
4.     Robert Goddard and World War II.
I just came upon your website "Stargazers to Starships".  Great site!  I
am researching a school project on Goddard and found the information
here useful.  I have a few questions, perhaps you can help me.
When the U.S. was spending money on the a-bomb during WWII, do you
think this prevented the government from providing Goddard with money to
research rockets for the military?
The German's developed the V-2 rocket, and Goddard believed they
copied his design.  I read that Germany sent spies to observe Goddard.
Did Goddard know he was being watched?
Reply
To answer your questions:
During WW-II, the government also spent money on rockets. The
        A-bomb project did not cut into this. Goddard was part
        of that effort, but the biggest rocketry effort was probably
        at Caltech, with Theodore Von Karman and Frank Malina.
        See the section in "Stargazers" on the
evolution of the rocket
.
Part of the problem was that Goddard preferred to work
        alone, while the Caltech people brought in bright students
        and had much better engineering support.
I never heard about the Germans spying on Goddard, and it seems
        very unlikely. They too had much better engineering support
        and took Goddard's ideas--DeLaval nozzle, liquid fuel,
        using the fuel to cool the engine, steering vanes in the
        exhaust etc.--and developed them beyond what Goddard himself
        was able to do.
A similar thing happened in WW-I. The Wright brothers
        invented the airplane in 1903, but the Europeans took their
        work and expanded it greatly, so that the German, British
        French and even Russian airplanes in that war were far
        superior to the ones America produced. After America entered
        the war, its pilots all flew British and French machines.
5.    Asymmetry of the Moon's orbit.
Subj:   Moon's perigee/apogee
I have just read your article in "Stargazers", but what I am trying to
dertermine is the observed variations in the time between events of
perigee and apogee. For example it may be 14 days from perigee to apogee
and say 12 days from apogee to perigee. Then at a further time the
periods can be reversed. I am seeking an explanation of this dynamic variation.
Reply
I looked up the ephemeris tables of the Moon, and you are right:
counting only the times between minimum and maximum distance from
Earth, those distances ARE variable, more than one would expect
for, say, an Earth satellite in a long elliptical orbit.
All I can give you now is a guess. The motion of the Moon is
really a 3-body process, influenced by the Sun as well, with
further perturbations perhaps due to Jupiter etc.  The orbit
is close to a circle, which means that a pull of a few 1000 km
this way or that can shift the time of largest and smallest
distance by a great amount, in contrast to what it would do to
a high-eccentricity orbit.
The literature comments "The orbit of the Moon is complicated"
and I think your question illustrates that complexity. If you look at page D-46 of the US Astronomical Almanac, for instance, you will see that even the
"low precision formulae" for lunar motion are alarmingly long, and
better approximations (found for instance in "Astronomical Algorithms" by Jean Meeus) are even longer.
So the bottom line (as they say) is that Kepler's laws still hold,
but actual motions may be complicated by additional factors.
6.     Measuring distance from the Sun.
I hope this isn't too dumb a question, but when a planet's distance from the
sun is given, should that be assumed to be from the center of the sun to the
center of the planet, or is it a measure of the surface of the sun to the
surface of the planet?
-- and if it's surface to surface, then what is considered the 'surface' of a
gas giant?
Reply
Your question isn't dumb, and it has a simple answer: from the center
of the Sun. A spherical mass--Sun, Earth, red giant or whatever--
pulls objects outside it with the same force as it would, if all
its mass were concentrated in its middle. As far as gravity is
concerned, the position of the surface makes no difference.
By the way--the Earth does
not
orbit the center of the Sun.
If the solar system contained only it and the Sun, the two would
orbit their common center of gravity. Of course, the Sun being
much more massive, that point is very close to the center of the Sun.
With more planets, the system orbits around the common center
of gravity, which I suspect is close to the center of gravity
of its heavyweights--Sun, Jupiter and Saturn. Viewed from some other
solar system, far away, this would make the Sun's position wobble a
bit, in response to the motions of the planets. In recent years,
astronomers have observed such subtle wobbles in the motions of
quite a few nearby stars, and concluded that like the Sun, they
had planets, too--big planets, like Jupiter. It is still too hard
to detect the effects of lightweights such as Earth, but progress
is being made.
Keep up your interest!
7.    Who owns the Moon?
Dear Gentlemen,
If you  be so kind as to reply, please tell me, is it true that the Moon
has a formal proprietor and who is this man?
Thank you in advance for your kindness.
Reply
I do not know who told you differently, but the moon belongs
to all of us together, even you, even I. When Neil Armstrong
stepped onto the moon he said "We came in peace in the name
of all of mankind" and that still holds true.
8.   Acceleration of a Rocket
I've looked your site and have taken some
information but I need more for my project. In my project I want to
search on the G force on the rockets  at launch.
Reply
I really do not know. The g-forces on a rocket vary with the design.
Manned rockets stay under about 5g, unmanned scientific satellites may be
launched at up to 10-12g, small sounding rockets with strongly built
instruments sometimes reach 30g, and missiles can also accelerate very
rapidly. The greatest acceleration is usually not at launch but just
before burn-out, because the thrust of the motor changes little
(or not at all), while the mass goes down as fuel is burned.
9.    Rebounding Ping-Pong Balls (re. section #35)
Can you send or suggest any more references to support the 20 miles ping
pong ball in and the 60 miles back out?  I am having trouble with my
colleagues who say it should be 40 miles back.
Reply
I hope you have a nice bet riding on this matter, because in that case
you win. The correct velocity is indeed 60 mph. The way I gave it in
"Stargazers" was meant to make it intuitively easy, but a rigorous
calculation gives the same result.
In what follows we agree that velocities from right to left are positive, from
left to right are negative.
Initially you have
A ball of mass M
1
moving with velocity – V
1
, against...
A paddle of mass M
2
, moving with velocity V
2
Afterwards we have
A ball of mass M
1
moving at velocity +W
1
A paddle of mass M
2
moving with velocity W
2
We assume the paddle is much more massive--M
2
>> M
1
(actually, it is mostly the mass of the hand behind the paddle), so that V
2
and W
2
are almost the same (=the impact does not slow the paddle by any great amount).
Conservation of momentum:
M
2
V
2
–  M
1
V
1
=    M
2
W
2
+ M
1
W
1
(1)
Conservation of energy (we assume the encounter is perfectly elastic--
approximate for the ping-pong ball, very well observed by gravity-assist maneuvers of spacecraft around planets):
M
2
V
2
2
/2 + M
1
V
1
2
/2    =    M
2
W
2
2
/2 + M
1
W
1
2
/2
multiply by 2:
M
2
V
2
2
+ M
1
V
1
2
=     M
2
W
2
2
+ M
1
W
1
2
(2)
In both numbered equations we collect all M
2
terms on the left and all M
1
terms on the right:
M
2
(V
2
- W
2
)    =     M
1
(W
1
+ V
1
)        
    (3)
M
2
[V
2
2
–  W
2
2
]    =     M
1
[W
1
2
–  V
1
2
]            (4)
By a well known factoring identity, for any two numbers A and B
A
2
–  B
2
=     (A + B)(A –  B)
so (4) becomes
M
2
(V
2
–  W
2
)(V
2
+ W
2
)    =     M
1
(W
1
–  V
1
)(W
1
+ V
1
)            (5)
If we divide equals by equals, what remains is still a valid equality.
So let the left side of (5) be divided by the left of (3), the the right
side of (5) by the right of (3):
V
2
+ W
2
=      W
1
–  V
1
(6)
Add V
1
to both sides
V
1
+ V
2
+ W
2
=      W
1
V
1
, V
2
and W
2
are each 20 mph. Therefore, the rebound velocity W
1
equals 60 mph. QED
10.    Rebounding ping-pong balls and gravity assist
Hello!
I've enjoyed browsing your fine web site, From Stargazers to Starships,
and I figured I would take a moment to let you know that.  I was particularly
intrigued by the chapter "Project HARP and the Martlet. "

There is one possible error I found in the site.  In Sections 35 and 35a, on
planetary swing-bys and the so-called "slingshot effect, " you state that the maximum velocity increase is imparted to a spacecraft when it approaches a planet head-on, or retrograde to its orbit.  My reading indicates that the opposite is true.  My sources are the following web sites:
JPL's Basics of Space Flight
http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/basics/bsf4-1.htm#gravity
Scientific American
http://www.sciam.com/askexpert/astronomy/astronomy10.html
I expect the discrepancy stems from the fact that the model used in
 From Stargazers to Starships is based on the ping-pong paddle
example.  The key difference is that the force exerted by a ping-pong
paddle on a ball is repulsive, whereas gravity is attractive.  Thus the
numbers are the same but the sign is reversed.
By the way, I did find the analogy to the Pelton turbine very interesting.
Thank you again for a very informative web site!
Reply
I believe that the ping-pong analogy is still valid, because it can be
reduced to simple arguments of the conservation of momentum and energy,
which should hold equally in a planetary-assist maneuver. Some other
correspondent questioned this result, and as a result, you can find that
calculation in item #9 of the question-and-answer section of
"Stargazers," linked at the end of the home page
[the item preceding this one]
.
What seems to confuse the issue is the following. A spacecraft would
get its biggest boost if it approached head-on, made a hairpin turn
around the rear of the moving planet and returned along a path 180
degrees from its first approach (that would be the ping-pong analogy).
Viewing the encounter from far north, if we put the moving planet at the
center of a clock dial with the Suns direction at 12 o'clock, we would
see the planet moving towards 3 o'clock, so our satellite has to
approach from that direction and return to it again.
When the Voyager and Pioneer spacecraft approached Jupiter and Saturn,
however, they were coming from the Earth, which is roughly in the same
direction as the Sun; in any case, their initial orbital velocity, which was essentially that of the Earth, which moves in the same direction as other planets', did not allow a head-on approach. Instead, they entered around 12 o'clock on the dial. They still rounded the night side and exited around 3 o'clock, which gave them an apprecible boost, though perhaps not the biggest one possible.
I have some old issues of "Science" on these events and in the one of
the Pioneer 10 fly by, for instance (page 304, 25 January 1974), the
satellite enters at 1 o'clock and leaves a bit after 3 o'clock. For the
Voyager 1 fly-by of Saturn (p. 160, April 10, 1981), entrance is around
11:30 and exit around 4:30 on the same dial.
You are right, of course, in that the force on the ping-pong ball is
repulsive while the planet's gravity attracts the spacecraft. However,
the strongest attraction occurs when the spacecraft is at its closest
approach,
on the night side,
and its direction then is along the
velocity of the planet, the
same
direction as the force exerted in the
ping-pong analogy.
With all this, I am grateful for your message. It again shows that at
least some users go into the details of "Stargazers". Quite a few errors
were caught only  thanks to people like yourself who checked out such
details.
11.    Why don't we feel the Sun's gravity pull?
Dear Dr. Stern:
I have asked several teachers and many other people
the following question but have not received any respectable answer:
The Earth is 93 million miles from the sun. Other planets, and even much
denser planets I might add, are much further yet from the sun. The
obviously strong gravitational attraction of the sun holds all of these
planets in orbits around the sun. If gravity could be simply defined as
a force that attracts matter, and the sun's gravitational pull is
sufficient to hold the Earth in orbit, what keeps it from pulling me off
the Earth? In fact, the gravitational pull of the sun is so weak at this
distance that It can't even produce enough pull to raise a hair on my
head. So how can it hold the Earth and several even denser planets (even
further out) in orbit?
So--if the gravitational force of the sun is powerful enough to
hold the Earth in orbit, then how could the Earth's gravitational force
be powerful enough to hold me down, counter-acting the gravitational
force of the sun?  Please unconfuse me!
Reply
Dear student
Two effects are at work, each of which would be quite sufficient:
(1) The force of gravity goes down with distance squared. For example,
since the Moon is about 60 times further from the center of the
Earth that you or anyone who is standing on the surface, the pull
of the Earth on each pound or kilogram of the Moon is 60 x 60 = 3600
times weaker than the pull on the same mass on the surface.
So: the Sun is indeed more massive, but also much more distant. As a
result, its pull on  each kilogram or pound at the Earth's distance is
only about 0.06% of the Earth's pull near the surface.
(2) Being on the orbiting Earth, your body already responds to the Sun's
gravity, by sharing the Earth's velocity of 30 km/s around the Sun.
Therefore there is nothing left over from the Sun's pull to make you move
any more.
In a similar way, an astronaut in orbit feels weightless, because the
Earth's gravity is already fully employed in keeping up the orbital
motion. The astronaut is not beyond the reach of Earth's gravity: if
it were so, the spacecraft would fly away never to return, rather than
stay in  orbit. It is just that--like a stone in free fall--gravity is
already doing to the astronaut all it can. It also does so on the
spaceship the astronaut rides in, leaving no extra force pulling the
astronaut down to the floor, or in any direction.
12.    How hot are red, white and blue (etc.) stars?
Hi, My name is Donny and I have a question that I cannot seem to find an
answer to....  How hot, exactly, is a blue star, a red star, a white
star, and other color of star?
Reply
Your question has an answer, but you have also to learn a bit
about what color is. Look at the following web site
http://www.phy6.org/stargaze/Sun4spec.htm
The stars for which statements about temperature are made are glowing
dense bodies of gas, so for them the "black body spectrum" is relevant.
In that spectrum, the curve of intensity against wavelength (color)
typically rises to a peak and then drops.
The total area under the curve tells how bright the light is: the hotter
the emitter, the higher the curve and the brighter the light. You know
this from experience: a flashlight with a weak battery glows weakly in orange,
a flashlight with a good battery glows bright yellow, and if you connect
a 3-volt battery to a 1.5 volt lightbulb, you get a very bright, very
white flash, and then darkness, because you have heated the wire inside
the lightbulb so much that it melted, and you have just lost your lightbulb.
And in that sequence, you also see the color move along the rainbow: orange
with a little heating (a feeble red when the battery is almost dead)
yellow under normal operation, white when it's too hot. The color you see
is where the peak is--and if it is blue, you see white, because all other
colors are also emitted, and white light is what the eye then sees.
Stars are like that too. We can say the Sun's photosphere radiates pretty
much like a black body at 5780 degrees absolute or about 5500 degrees
centigrade, by the way its colors are distributed. The color tells how
hot it is, and I think "blue" here means white-blue; such a star would be at about 10,000 degrees.
David
13.    How does the solar wind move?
I am confused about the solar wind and don't want to
mislead my students.  On a web site about magnetic storms I read the following:
"This storm affects
the earth when it is on the western half of the sun, not when it is dead
center.  This is because the solar wind follows a curved path between the sun
and the earth not a straight-line path."
Is the solar wind influenced by the magnetic field of the sun so it has a curved path to the earth?  Or is this too much of a simplification?
What really happens?
Reply
Physics and astronomy get complicated at times. Will the interplanetary
magnetic field curve the path of the solar wind? Without peeking at the
observations, one can only say "it depends," and what it depends on is
the ratio between the density of particle energy (density n times average of
0.5 mv^2) and the magnetic field energy density (B^2/2 mu-zero).
This ratio is often called "beta" in plasma physics, and it's an important
quantity in experiments aimed at confining a plasma for nuclear fusion.
If beta is much less than 1, the magnetic field is the dominant factor
and particles meekly follow its field lines, making containment easy.
Practical fusion however requires a greater beta, and if beta exceeds 1,
the plasma starts pushing the magnetic field around. The way it does so
is by subtly segregating its charges, to create a charge density and
hence an electric field, and electric fields can allow a plasma to move
whichever way it wants.
Suppose the magnetic field is constant and equals B
0
in the z
direction, and the plasma is moving along the x axis. Then an electric
field E
0
= -vB
0
in the y direction will allow it to do so, canceling the magnetic force on any electric charge q, equal to qvB
0
along -y. (It also works out with spiraling particles).
The same happens with the solar wind, where beta may be 5 or more.
As a result, the solar wind moves radially out, though it gets buffetted
a bit, and it's not clear by what.
Now what about the MAGNETIC field? There is a rule (for plasmas with
high beta, satisfying the "MHD condition"), that "
particles that initially share a field line, continue doing so indefinitely
" (there exist some extra "fine print" conditions, but we ignore them here).
What follows below is the original answer sent to the questioner. Later this was converted to a graphical exercise,
Section S-6a   Interplanetary Magnetic Field Lines
, linked to section S-6. You can either link there or continue below (or both), as you choose.
Take a sheet of paper, put on it a small circle--that is the Sun viewed from far north of it, or rather, it is a circle in the corona, some level above the Sun, where the solar wind begins. On this scale, let's say the solar wind moves one inch (1") per day (or if you wish, 2 cm). Draw from the center 6 or 7 radial rays 13.3 degrees apart. Mark as "P" the point where the first ray--the one furthest clockwise--cuts the circle. We look at 6 ions located at P, and
therefore presumably on the same field line--let's number them 1, 2...6.
We have advance information that 1 will be released into the solar wind
today, 2, tomorrow, 3 the day after, and so on. Mark P with 1--that is
where ion no. 1 is today.
Next day, P is on the second ray. Point 1 has moved 1" outward, radially, and Point 2 is at the base of the new ray, ready to go. Next day: Point 1
is now 2" out on the first ray, point 2 is 1" out on the 2nd, point 3 at the base of the 3rd, ready to move. And so on.
Five days later, 1 is 5" out on the first ray, 2 is 4" out on the 2nd
 3 is 3" out on the 3rd, etc., and 6 is at the base of the 6th ray.
However, all these points started on the same field line, so they are
still strung out along one line. CONNECT THE DOTS marking the outermost ions on the 6th day and you have a spiral line of the interplanetary field: if the ions started on the same line, they must still be on one.
The solar wind in all this has moved radially. But now and then the
sun releases bursts of high energy particles, say from flares. The
energy of these particles may be high enough to endanger astronauts
in interplanetary space--but their density is very low, so their beta is
also low. THEY therefore are guided by the magnetic field lines (rather
than deforming them to their own flow), and therefore they move spirally.
The solar wind takes about 5 days to cover 1 AU. Therefore, if the Earth
is to receive particles guided by an interplanetary field line when it
is on the first ray, the emission has to be at the base of ray 6--that
is, near the western limb. The high-energy particles take only an hour or
so to arrive, depending on their energy of course.
14.    The shape of the orbit of Mars
Dear NASA,
I have read your articles about stargazers and I believed this is one of
 the most interesting subjects in astronomy. Here is a question which came
 up when I was reading 'Planetary evolution', could you please help, thanks.
 Mars moves in an elliptical orbit around the Sun, what is the relative distance
 of the Sun to this ellipse? Would it be at one end of the major axis of the
 ellipse?
Reply
The eccentricity of the Mars orbit is 0.09337, the semi-major axis
 of the orbit is A = 1.524 AU (1 AU is the mean Sun-Earth distance, about
150,000,000 km; AU stands for astronomical unit) and distances of
perigee (closest approach) and apogee (most distant) are B = 1.381 AU
 and C = 1.666 AU (letters are just notation for here).
These are the numbers. What do they mean? I remember seeing long ago a
German physics text from the 1920s drawing the orbit of Mars. One side
of the line was a circle, one side was the orbit, and the varying
thickness of the line showed the difference between the two. It was
hard to see that difference!
Let us calculate the length and width of the ellipse. The length (through
 the two foci--the line on which the Sun is located) is 2A = B + C = 3.048
or 3.047 AU. The displacement of the center from either focus is D = (C-B)/2 =
0.1425 AU and the width is 2G where
G
2
= A
2
– D
2
G = 1.51732 AU                 2G = 3.035 AU
I do not think you or I would be able to distinguish an oval with dimensions
(3.048, 3.035) from a true circle! The position of the Sun at one focus
is however notably asymmetrical, about 10% of the distance from the center
to the edge.
David
15.     What if the Earth's axis were tilted 90° to the ecliptic?
I was recently looking at the webpage
"Seasons of the Year"
and I read about what would happen if the earth's axis were perpendicular to the ecliptic.  I was just wondering if you could give me some insight on what would happen if the ecliptic was inclined at a 90-degree angle with respect to the celestial equator?  Would this mean that earth's orbit would
travel along this "new ecliptic" while the north and south poles are
travelling along this "new ecliptic"?
Reply
The hypothetical case you describe does in fact exist: for some
unknown reason, the spin axis of the planet Uranus is almost exactly
in the ecliptic.
That means that at some time one pole (let me call it the north
pole, even though that "north" direction is almost perpendicular
to the northward direction from Earth) points at the Sun. Then the
northern hemisphere is in constant light and the other one in
constant darkness. Half an orbit later--42 years or so--the roles
are reversed. And halfway between those times, the planetary rotation
axis is perpendicular to the Sun's direction, making day and night
alternate in a way similar to what the Earth experiences at equinox.
I leave it as an exercise to you to figure out whether Uranus ever
receives sunlight the way Earth does at solstice.
Go to main list of questions
(by topic)
Back to the Master List
Timeline
Glossary
Math index
Author and Curator:
Dr. David P. Stern
Mail to Dr.Stern:
stargaze
("at" symbol)
phy6.org
.
Last updated 9-17-2004
Above is background material for archival reference only.
NASA Official:
Adam Szabo
Curators:
Robert Candey
,
Alex Young
,
Tamara Kovalick
NASA Privacy, Security, Notices