"Get a Straight Answer"
Site Map
Get a Straight Answer
Please note!
Listed below are questions submitted by users of "From Stargazers to Starships" and the answers given to them.
This is just a selection--
of the many questions that arrive, only a few are listed.  The ones included below are
either
of the sort that keeps coming up again and again,
or else
the answers make a special point, often going into details which might interest many users.
For a complete list, including later questions not listed below,
click here
.
You may also
link from here
to a listing of questions
arranged by topic
.
Items covered:
About asteroids hitting Earth.
The swirling of water in a draining tub.
Dispensing water at zero-g.
Robert Goddard and World War II.
Asymmetry of the Moon's orbit.
Measuring distance from the Sun.
Who owns the Moon?
Acceleration of a rocket.
Rebounding ping pong balls (re. #35)
Rebounding ping pong balls and gravity-assist
Why don't we feel the Sun's gravity pull?
How hot are red, white and blue (etc.) stars?
How does the solar wind move?
The shape of the orbit of Mars
What if the Earth's axis were tilted 90° to the ecliptic?
Mars and Venus
Where is the boundary between summer and winter?
The Ozone Hole
What keeps the Sun from blowing up?
Those glorious Southern Skies!
Should we fear big solar outbursts?
Planetary line-up and the sunspot cycle
What are comet tails made of?
If light speed sets the limit, why fly into space?
Does precession mis-align ancient monuments?
Why does the Earth rotate? Why is it a sphere?
What's so hard about reaching the Sun?
Where does space begin?
Gravity at the Earth's Center
Radiation hazard in space (3 queries)
"Danger, falling satellites"?
The Lagrangian L3 point
Distance to the Horizon on an Asteroid
Overtaking Planets
Falling Towards the Sun
The Polar Bear
Are the Sun's Rays Parallel?
More thrust in reverse than going forward?
The varying distance between Earth and Sun
Mission to Mars
Kepler's calculation
The Appearance (Phase) of the Moon
Stability of Lagrangian points
Can an Asteroid Impact Change the Earth's Orbit?
Can Gravity Increase with Depth?
Lightspeed, Hyperspace and Wormholes
Why do Rockets Spin?
Around What does the Sun Revolve?
Why are planets in nearly the same plane?
The Shapes of Rockets and Spacecraft
Space Debris
Teaching Nuclear Fusion
Contribution of different elements to Sunlight
Jewish Calendar
Spaceflight Without Escape Velocity?
Who first proposed a round Earth?
Does Precession change the Length of a Year?
The Analemma
Changes of the Polar Axis of Earth
Van Allen Belt and Spaceflight
Nearest Star Outside Our Galaxy
(a) Why are Satellites Launched Eastward?
What is a "Sun Synchronous" orbit?
(b) Why are satellites launched from near the equator?
How Tall Can People Get?
Gunpowder and Rockets
Precession
Solar Sails
(a) Distance to the Big Dipper
(b) Big Dipper star names
Was Moon landing a hoax?
Clockwise or counter-clockwise?
Isotopes in Center of Earth
Density of the Sun's corona and the "Scale Height"
Did Tesla extract free energy from thin air?
What does "lapse rate" mean?
Motion of the Sun through space
Teaching about tides
Distance to the Horizon
Can  geocentrist theory still be possible?
Can Earth's rotation reverse, like its magnetic polarity?
Why  is the Earth round?
The De Laval Nozzle
Why 23.5 degrees?
What is Gravitational Collapse?
Can Earth capture a second moon?
How far does the Earth's gravity extend?
How far is the Moon?
Twinkle, twinkle little star--
How I wonder, what you are.
Teaching about seasons
Space Launches by Cannon--A
Space Launches by Cannon--B
The Southern Pole of the Sky
Do Astrologers use Wrong Positions for Planets?
Why does the Moon have bigger craters?
Why does Gravity Exist?
Atmospheric "Thermals"--Triggered by Electric Forces?
What would happen if Earth rotated faster?
Where do gravity of Earth and Sun balance?
The Ultimate Astronomy Tool
High Temperature in Cold Outer Space
Refraction of sunlight and starlight by the atmosphere
Advice to a would-be astronomer
The effect of the Color of Light on the Output of Solar Cells
What is "radiation"?
Height of the Atmosphere
How does the upper atmosphere get so hot?
History of the use of De Laval's nozzle on rockets
Why don't Space Rockets use Wings?
Distance of horizon on Mars
Stopping the rotation of Earth?
The equation of a parabola
When does Jewish Sabbath start in the far north?
Where is the center of the global landmass?
What if our Sun was a much hotter star?
Finding the north direction
Why not use a heat shield going up?
When and where can rainbows be seen?
The unusual rotation of the planet Venus
Why not use nuclear power for spaceflight?
"Doesn't heat rise?"
Have any changes been observed on the Moon?
Why isn't our atmosphere flung off by the Earth's rotation?
Can kinetic energy be reconverted to work?
Does any location get the same number of sunshine hours per year?
Speed of toy car rolling off an inclined ramp
Acceleration due to gravity
Re-entry from Space
Balancing a Bicycle
Is Absolute Zero reached on the Moon?
Why isn't Longitude measured from 0° to 360°?
"Constellation" or "Asterism"?
"Position of the Stars when I was Born"
Rotation of the Earth's Core"
How hot is the Sun?
How much weaker is gravity higher up?
Eclipse of Venus?
The Big Bang
Thanks for the "Math Refresher" in Spanish
The Pressure of Sunlight
How is the instant the seasons change determined?
Operation of Ion Rockets
Physical Librations of the Moon
The De-Laval Nozzle
Why does the space shuttle rotate at take-off?
Cold Fusion
What if a Neutron Star hit the Sun?
Why did the Moon appear Red?
Centrifuge for Whirling Astronauts
What Holds Galaxies Together?
View of Earth and Moon from Mars
Appearance of the Moon (1)
Appearance of the Moon (2): Does it "roll around"?
Altitude of the tail of the Big Dipper
Sudden decompression, 5 miles up
Do Negative Ions make you Feel Good?
Shape of the Earth's Orbit
Questions about the Solar Corona:
(1) Why don't its particles separate by weight?
(2) What accelerates the solar wind?
Why does the rising Sun look so big?
Drawing a Perpendicular Line in Rectangular Coordinates
Unequal Seasons
Is the Big Dipper visible from Viet Nam?
Holes in a Solar Sail
Consequences of no more solar X-rays
Science Fair Project on the Size of the Earth
Superposition of Waves
The Sun and Seasons
If the Earth's Rotation would
S t o p
...
(1)
If the Earth's Rotation would
C h a n g e
...
(2)
What if the Earth stopped in its orbit?
Fast Trip to Mars
(1)
Fast Trip to Mars
(2)
Spacecraft Attitude
What makes the Earth rotate?
Energy from the Earth's Rotation?
How were planets created?
Does Precession of the Equinoxes shift our Seasons?
"Zenial Days" on Hawaii
Sun's Temperature and Energy Density of Sunlight
Teaching about energy in 8th grade
About the jetstream
What would a breach in a space station do?
Gravity at the Earth's center
Freak waves on the ocean
Citation on "Bad Greenhouse" web page
How can radio waves carry sound?
Do Cosmic Rays produce lightning?
Star positions shifted by the atmosphere
The equation of time
Launch window of the Space Shuttle
No "Man in the Moon" from Australia?
Picturing the Sun from a different distance
What makes the sun shine so brightly?
Re-entry from orbit
Effects of weightlessness on one's body
Blimps on Mars
Planet Mars "huge" in the sky, in August 2005?
Astronomy and telescopes for ones' own children
Does the solar wind have escape velocity
Astronomy for cliff-dwellers of New York City
Portable star finder
What if the Moon was closer? (2 questions)
Why doesn't the Moon have an atmosphere?
Telling a 3-year old about the atmosphere  (2 questions)
Three-color vision
Superconductors work, universe expands--with no energy input. Why?
Shuttle orbit and Earth rotation
Worrying about Wormholes and Black Holes
What should I study?
The greenhouse effect
Separation between lines of latitude and longitude
Motion of air: hot to cold, or high pressure to low?
Removing "Killer Asteroids"
Strange light seen from Hawaii
Is the Sun attached to another star?
What if the Sun turned into a black hole?
Do absorption lines have a Doppler shift?
What are "Electromagnetic Waves"?
Why are the two daily tides unequal?
Why air gets cold higher up--a wrong explanation
Any limits to Newton's 2nd Law
Gravity at the Earth's center
Does the Earth follow a "squiggly" orbit?
Third grader asks: how far to zero gravity?
"How does inertia affect a rolling ball"?
What determines the quality of a telescope?
Why design maps around curved lines?
"Drag" by the Sun on the Earth's motion
Does precession affect the time of summer?
(2 questions)
Newton's law or Bernoulli's?
Does the universe have an axis?
Frictional electricity
Syllabus for catching up on physics
Parabolic reflector
At what distance does Earth start looking spherical?
Is the Sun on fire?
Confusion about the "Big Bang"
How did Tycho calibrate his instruments?
Gases that fill balloons
Asian tradition on the start of winter
Why our year starts at January 1
Sticking a hand out of a window...
One year of continuous sunlight?
Shielding out radio waves
The way gravity changes with depth
The Sun's Axis
"Gravity Particles"?
A "short stay on Mars"
Weight and mass
"The Moon Hoax"
Shuttle re-entry from space
Energy levels: plus or minus?
How can such small targets be accurately hit
so far away?
A teacher asks about compiling lesson plans
Why the Moon has its phases
How can a spacecraft self-rotate?
Stability during a rocket launch
Boiling point of water in space
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky
The Color Indigo
Electromagnetic Waves and Electromagnetic Induction
Why do orbits curve?
The "Sundial Bridge" in Redding
(a) Temperature in space
(b) Exposure to the space environment: Freeze or burn?
Remote sensing of Thunderstorms
What keeps Electrons away from the Atomic Nucleus?
The Stars on the Winter Solstice of 2012
Mars Sunset
Gravity at the Center of Earth
The Big Bang
"How Often are Stars Born?"
The Path of Lightning
Launching a Rocket from an Airplane
The Equation of Continuity
The Four Corners Monument
Which among the brightest stars is closest to N Pole?
Gravity Assist
Is the Centrifugal Force "Real"?
How do we know Earth is bigger than the Moon?
Sound Waves on the Sun?
What if we had to give up use of Satellites?
Rotation of Venus
"Proper Motion" of Stars
Doppler Shift from the Big Bang
Science Fiction scenario for a Flight to Mars
Motion of the Moon
"Iridium" flares
Discovering Planets outside the Solar System
Landing speed of airplane
The Hubble Constant
Are Summer Nights Darker?
"Space Elevator"
Black Holes
291a.
Angle between ecliptic and Milky Way
291b.
(Continuation)--About the year 2012
Don't use Diesel fuel in a gasoline car!
How bright is our Sun when seen from space?
What is a "field"?
Outer limits of the Solar System
Gravitational Energy
Stresses on a Railroad Bridge
The constellation of Cassiopeia
Tracking of radioactivity carried by winds
Why can't the space shuttle reenter "slowly"?
"The Standard Model of the Universe"
About the Maya Calendar
Are light sabers possible?
Can the heat of sunshine make the Earth expand?
About Mountains
"Will the World end in 2012?"
(a,b)
Advice to graduating High School Student
Could a (heat resistant!) ship float on the Sun?
Reducing the fuel weight of the Space Shuttle?
How do Rockets Land?
The Earth's Spin reduced by Global Warming
Circumnavigation of the Sun
Are nuclear forces merely gravity at very close distance?
Changing the Earth's Rotation
Why are planetary orbits eccentric?
Forces on Comet-dwellers
Nuclear reactors and bombs
Why doesn't magnetism affect electro-magnetic waves?
Is humanity changing the climate, or is it the Sun and the Earth's magnetism?
Advice to home-schooling parent
Science of Clothing
Calculating a Collision
The Coriolis force and more
Why isn't the solar system stratified by density?
Tapping Atmospheric Electricity
Global Disaster in 2012?
What's the difference between speed and velocity?
Effect of Gravity on Electromagnetic Waves
Why is North the reference, not South?
The lowest 700 km of our Atmosphere
Doomsday 2012?
Where does a Flying Bird get its Support?
Why does Sun seem to move?
Why don't waves disturb each other?
Does the Moon's motion Change?
Big Dipper and Weather
What IS the Ecliptic?
Precession, Greenhouse and more...
Latest Sunrise, Earliest Sunset
Falling off the Earth's Bottom?
Rolling down a slopea>
Pelton Wheel Efficiency
Energy loss rate of our Sun
The Sun's distance
Why does sunlight have a continuous spectrum?
Harry Paul Sprain's perpetual Motion Device
Can the plasma that fills space help spaceflight?
Spiral arms of our galaxy
What powers a glider?
UFOs
Maximum speed for propeller-driven airplane?
The speed at which gravity spreads
Layers of the Earth
Why doesn't the sky fall on us?
Imagine a non-rotating Earth
Flying east with a 1° error
US Flag on the Moon
Rope stretched across a long lake...
About studying electronics in the USA
Publish
Stargazers
as a book?
Charging of Earth by lightning:    +   or   –  ?
If no stars were seen--could Earth's orbital motion be discovered?
Local Solar Time in Iceland
Is orbital motion same as free fall?
Build a straight tower in warped space?
The 2011-2 sunspot maximum
Is Earth adding mass?
Shape of a "bottle rocket"
Fantasy spaceflight vs. reality
Telling a 7-year old about stars "dying"
(1) Why is lightning jagged?     (2) What did Tesla do?
How can the north wall of my house be in sunlight?
Heating the inside of Earth
Dawning of the Age of Aquarius
Why is hydrogen the fuel of choice?
Gamma ray bursts
Counter-clockwise swirling motion in the atmosphere
Leap years on the Jewish calendar
Earth axis tilt and climate (1)
Earth axis tilt and climate (2)
Does the Sun move?
Can the Sun interfere with the visibility of the Big Dipper?
Why can't we feel the Earth's rotation?
Is our galaxy held together by a central black hole?
Why don't gas planets just evaporate?
Source of the Sun's energy
Point of gravity equilibrium
Solar system motion through the Galaxy
Spaceflight by waiting for the Earth to turn?
Does Earth rotation affect size of creatures?
The year 2012
Are our galactic arms winding up or opening up?
Advice to a home-schooling mother
Are all stars we see suns?
Newton's 3rd law
396A
Posssibility of Asteroid Hitting Earth (1)
396B
Posssibility of Asteroid Hitting Earth (2)
Author's IQ
Global Warming caused by Sun getting nearer?
The year 2012
Empty space behind North Star?
The year 2012 and the 26,000 year cycle
"Quarter Squares"
Do Rockets need "something to push against"?
Sunrise-Sunset asymmetry
Re-entry from orbit
Earth Axis and Gravity
The year 2012
Choosing an Aerospace Career
Advice for "new" physics teacher
Paradox of Time Travel
Is 7th grade Earth science boring?
Air Resistance
Experimenting with Microwave Oven
Is the Sun losing mass?
Sun's position at noon, south of equator
Fred Hoyle's theory of the Sun's Corona
Why don't Protons and Electrons combine?
Days in a Year
Position of the Moon in the sky
Earth crossing Galactic Equator?
Is the geocentric theory ruled out?
Does the Southern Sky have a Pole Star?
What is the fate of starlight energy?
Double-slit diffraction of particles
Does the Sun overhead reduce effective weight?
Evidence for Global Warming ?
Distances to the Equator
Weight on the Equator and at the Pole
Why doesn't gravity overcome buoyancy?
The Prime Meridian
Is L2 in the Earth's Shadow?
In what direction is Israel from NY?
Is the World Overpopulated?
Magnetic Energy
Magnetic Carnot Cycle
Defining the Equator
Second Moon for Earth?
The year 2012 and a distant companion of our Sun
Distance between two points on a sphere
Getting sucked I by Gravity
The work of Nikola Tesla
Firing a cannon straight up
Does one see half the sky--or more, or less?
Why are nights dark?
The origin of the Solar System
Flying to other planets
The heat of the Sun's corona
Crossing our galaxy's equator
Newton's 3rd law--in statics and dynamics
Barycenter of Earth-Moon system
What if Earth rotated in only 10 hours>
If you have a relevant question of your own, you can send it to
stargaze
["at" symbol]
phy6.org
114.   Why not use a heat shield going up?
The other day a colleague asked me a question that I could not answer and which keeps intriguing me. "We know that (the shield of) a spacecraft that re-enters the earth's atmosphere heats up spectacularly because it is hit and slowed down by air-molecules. Is there a similar problem when it is going the other way, at take off? It is going through the same amount of air and acceleration looks quite similar to deceleration, only the other way around." The only answer that I could think of is that a good part of the acceleration might take place at higher altitudes where there is less air, and braking is done only by using the atmosphere.
Reply
The reason you suggested yourself is pretty much what happens.
Going up, it is the rocket engine which provides acceleration and energy. Because air resistance robs energy and is undesirable, the rocket deliberately rises vertically, to go though the denser atmosphere as quickly as possible. The vehicle gets most of its velocity, and almost all of the kinetic energy, at high altitudes where air density is too low to make a great difference. With the space shuttle "Columbia," even that might not have been enough: by the time it reached twice the velocity of sound, the  atmosphere around it was still dense enough to rip a piece of foam insulation off its fuel tank, and it hit the orbiter with great force, breaking the heat shield.
On coming down (with spacecraft which we want to come down undamaged), the atmosphere is the brake absorbing the energy. We need that air resistance, and the heating is a result of absorbed energy!  The big concern that energy should not be absorbed too fast, otherwise the heat gets too intense and may melt the heat shield and everything else.  That is why the space shuttle comes down at a low angle, trying to stay as long as possible in a layer with the right density: If the shuttle comes in too high, not enough energy is lost, if too low, too much.  The density is also important in supporting the shuttle, which--like a kite--needs part of the resistance to help it from coming down too fast.
A final note: heat shields get very hot, but most of the energy, almost all of it, is given to the shock which forms ahead of the heat  shield.  It thus heats the air, not the re-entering vehicle.
115.   When and where can rainbows be seen?
This may be a very unusual request but I need to know the sun's angular  elevation at noon , winter solstice, at 42 degrees N latitude. Not necessary but curious same for summer solstice.
Believe it or not this all has to do with rainbows. I had an argument with someone whom I told that I have never observed a rainbow except in the morning or evening. The Sun has to be low in the east or west, and the bow then appears on the opposite side of the sky. Never observed one in the northern sky.
Could you help me out by answering these questions?
Reply
Actually, the problem you ask about is fully discussed on my page
http://www.phy6.org/stargaze/Snavigat.htm
On the winter solstice, the noontime Sun will be 42 + 23.5 = 65.5 degrees from the zenith or 24.5 degrees from the horizon
On the summer solstice, the noontime Sun will be 42 - 23.5 = 18.5.5 degrees from the zenith or 71.5  degrees from the horizon
The center of the rainbow is always in the direction opposite from the Sun, and the primary rainbow has a radius of 42 degrees (secondary, 54). Thus it is required that the Sun be appreciably closer to the horizon that 42 degrees. This does happen in the morning or evening, but in principle could also occur near noon in mid-winter, in which case the rainbow would be centered on north. Having an end of the rainbow pass north of you  (its part near the horizon) is much more likely.
116.   The unusual rotation of the planet Venus
I am a university student who was asked to research some common legends to determine if they are true.  One of the "facts" which I am supposed to verify is:
"
Venus is the only planet that rotates clockwise.
"
Is the above statement true?  And if so, why?  Why would Venus rotate in the opposite direction of all the other planets?
Reply
The statement is true.  You my look up
http://www.phy6.org/stargaze/Svenus.htm"
"Why" is harder--I am not sure that anyone knows for sure.  The sense in which all planets in our solar system (and the Sun) rotate is presumably the same as that of the cloud from which the solar system condensed. When that happened, presumably many fragments collided to create each planet, and some average behavior of those collisions produced the rotation. One might even speculate that Mercury and Venus, the ones closest to the Sun  once had large outer gas envelopes, and the way these evaporated in the Sun's heat may have contributed to the loss of rotation.  That, though, is just a guess.
By the way, "clockwise" only has a meaning when you give a point of observation. You might write "clockwise when viewed from north." Viewed from south, the same rotation is counterclockwise. In the same manner, if you have a transparent clock and stand behind it, the handles will seem to move counterclockwise.
117.   Why not use nuclear power for spaceflight?
Why not use nuclear energy to power spaceflight?  After all,  few pounds of plutonium contain as much energy as thousands of tons of rocket fuel!
Reply
Nice idea. However, to fly in space takes rocket thrust, not just energy.
By Newton's laws, the forward momentum given to any rocket is always equal to the backward momentum given to the jet fired backwards.  That momentum, in its turn, depends on two factors--how much mass is expelled by the jet, how many tons per second, and the speed with which it is expelled. Nuclear energy can supply the speed, but
something
must provide the expelled mass.
You might think next that given some source of mass (say, a tank filled with water), plentiful nuclear energy would make it possible to eject it much faster. But how?  Rocket engines work by converting heat into directed motion, in a very efficient way, but they already run about as hot as available materials can stand. Nuclear energy could provide more heat, but no rocket engine could stand it.
Early in the space age a serious effort existed to build a nuclear rocket, getting its thrust by heating hydrogen with nuclear fission. A jet of hydrogen, coming from a rocket engine at a certain temperature, is much faster than a jet of burned rocket fuel, coming from a rocket engine at the same temperature. The reason is linked to the fact that hydrogen molecules are much lighter than those of any burned fuel.
However, the rate at which rocket engines used in spaceflight supply energy is enormous--e.g. the shuttle's engines burn a ton of fuel or more each second. The stresses are enormous, and the risk of nuclear material and waste products of fission getting into the atmosphere was too great, and so the project ended.
A visionary proposal of the 1950s proposed a "rocket" cabin with a strong flat plate on the bottom (oil would be sprayed on it for protection), and a trapdoor through which small nuclear bombs could be dropped, detonating some distance away and pushing the craft forward. On paper, it seemed feasible, but an actual nuclear test was deemed hazardous, sure to release contamination.  The nuclear test-ban treaty of 1963 ended all efforts in this direction.
I should add here that a book has recently appeared about "Project Orion", by (what I take as) the son of Freeman Dyson, prime mover in that project:
Project Orion: The True Story of the Atomic Spaceship
George B. Dyson, George Dyson, David Sobel (Editor)
118.   "Doesn't heat rise?"
I was helping my wife in her 3rd grade class yesterday and one of the 
students came up with an interesting question. We were talking about how it gets 
cooler as you increase your altitude (specifically in the mountains). I was 
guessing that the temperature drops about 3 degrees for every 1000 ft that you 
climb.
I was really caught off guard with a question from the "peanut gallery." It 
was - "
Doesn't heat rise?
" I said that that is correct, and conversely cold 
would tend to remain near the ground. He further questioned - "If heat rises then 
why wouldn't it get hotter as you increase your altitude?  I had no 
explanation. Can you help?
Reply
The answer below is tailored (I hope!) to the 3rd grade level, not an easy task.
-----------------------------
It is true--the atmosphere is hot at its bottom and cool higher up (at least for the first 10 miles or so). It is true even though, as we know, hot air tends to rise!  It all happens because THE BOTTOM OF THE ATMOSPHERE IS WHERE AIR RECEIVES ITS HEAT.
That heat arrives when sunlight hits the ground and warms it up. Think of what would happen if no way existed for removing it! The ground would get hotter and hotter--oceans, lakes and rivers would boil away, life would become impossible.  Actually, we see rather little temperature change near the ground--just day-to-night fluctuations, and slow changes with weather and seasons. Such observations suggest that on the average,
heat is removed just as fast as it is received.
Where can it go?  Only one place--outer space, the sky above!  We know that anything that is warm shines in
some
sort of light ("radiates"). A lightbulb filament is hot enough to shine in visible light, but a hot teapot (say) also shines (radiates).  Our eye cannot see such "infra-red" light, produced (at a much lower rate) by moderately warm objects, but a hand held close to the pot will sense the radiation, as heat streaming out.  (Rattlesnakes have special sensors to detect infra-red (IR) light, helping them find warm blooded prey.)
So at first sight, this appears to be a simple situation.  The Sun shines on the ground and gives it heat, and the ground returns that heat to space as invisible infra-red radiation.
But this simple process is made complicated by the so-called "
greenhouse effect
."  Air is relatively transparent, but some gases in it absorb and re-emit infra red very efficiently--water vapor, methane and increasingly, carbon dioxide, so called "greenhouse gases." Put a few drops of India ink in a glass of water, and it darkens appreciably; with these gases, similarly, a little bit of those gases ABSORBS A LOT.  By absorbing and re-emitting IR, they make the IR light bounce around, rather than letting it head straight to space.
That makes it difficult for heat to escape, and keep the ground warm; something similar happens in a gardener's greenhouse, enclosed by glass panes, which let sunlight
in
but absorb IR.  Such random bouncing-around continues until the IR (some of it, anyway) reaches a layer so high that not enough air and water vapor are left to send it back, and then the radiation escapes to space. That layer is known as the
"tropopause"
and it is typically 8 miles up.
This "greenhouse effect" would keep the air warm near the ground, even if our cars and power plants did not emit carbon dioxide (although those emissions make the effect more pronounced).
The air then does a second thing
to help getting rid of its heat: IT RISES.
Air cools as it rises, because air pressure around it is lower, and an expanding gas cools (that is how air-conditioners work).  But because this process is happening everywhere and all the time, the SURROUNDING air is already cooler than the air near the ground. As long at air is warmer than its surroundings, it keeps rising. If a chunk of air started out extra-warm, it may well STILL BE warmer than the air around it, even higher up, so it keeps rising. Ideally, it rises until it arrives near the tropopause, where it can get rid of its heat. After that, being cooler, it sinks down again and is replaced by more heated air from below.
(Why does air pressure get lower as one rises? Because air near the ground is compressed by the weight of all the other air above it.  If you rise about 5 kilometers--3 miles and a little bit more--half the air is below you, only half of it is above and contributes to the compression, and so, the pressure there is only half of what it was near the ground. Go up 5 more kilometers and the pressure is about half as much again--a quarter of what it is near the ground.  That is where jetliners fly, and the low pressure is the reason their cabins are sealed and pressurized--also why climbers on Mt. Everest carry oxygen bottles).
This process of cooling, rising and finally radiating heat away
is very important. THAT IS THE REASON WE HAVE WEATHER! The whole weather process is driven by the heat of the Sun, and by the collection of processes by which the Earth returns heat to space.
The above is very, very simplified, especially since it ignores humidity. Actual air also contains water vapor--water which was evaporated by the Sun and dissolved in the atmosphere, just as sugar dissolves in a cup of coffee. Since the Sun has provided heat energy for the evaporation, water vapor acts a bit like extra heat given to the air; when the water is removed as rain, air gets that heat back and is warmed, which is what drives thunderstorms.  More about all these in
http://www.phy6.org/stargaze/Sweather1.htm
I am not sure, however, whether the role of water can be explained at the level of 3rd grade.  Please let me know how all above explanations were received!
119.    Have any changes been observed on the Moon?
I happened to wonder if anyone has looked at the moon in the last 100 years or so and noticed a crater that 'wasn't there yesterday'. How many new craters have been observed and how big are they? That could kind of say things about safety HERE! We do have frequent meteorites, after all. I have even seen one myself
Reply
I once had an office on the same floor as a lady scientist, Winnifred Cameron, who very much wanted to find such changes. She used a special viewing device looking at two pictures of a region on the Moon, taken under similar conditions but at different times, flipping from one to the other and looking to see if anything changed.  I don't think anything ever did.  She was particularly interested in observations of a Russian named Kozyrev, who claimed to see glows.
As for impacts, it is only possible to see pretty big ones. If meteorite impacts are your interest, read the chapter "The Shoemaker Comets" in
"First Light" by Richard Preston
. It's a great book. Gene Shoemaker is unfortunately gone from us, killed in a head-on collision while rounding a blind curve in Australia's outback.  Those roads are usually completely empty, but you never know fate.
120.   Why isn't our atmosphere flung off by the Earth's rotation?
I have wondered for years how the earth keeps our atmosphere. The equator moves at almost 1000 MPH and the atmosphere is fluid. The fact that there isn't any wind (to speak of, at least resulting from the earth's rotation) says that the attraction of gravity is stronger than the centrifugal force trying to throw it off. Do we know if the amount of atmosphere is increasing, decreasing or remaining the same? It just seems to me that there should be a lot of turbulence in the atmosphere/space boundary region, although the 'emptiness' of space probably can't provide any drag on the atmosphere.
Reply
Concerning the atmosphere... the centrifugal force on the Earth's equator is just a fraction of 1% of gravity; it makes the Earth slightly oval, but nothing falls off.  The effect was found in the 1600s, when pendulum clocks accurate in Europe slowed down near the equator. Jupiter is bigger and rotates faster--so its equatorial flattening is larger, large enough to be evident in photos through the telescope.
If you went around Earth at orbital velocity--one circuit in 90 minutes--the centrifugal force would just balance gravity.  Our rotation speed (one circuit in about 24 hours) is nowhere near that.
121.   Can kinetic energy be reconverted to work?
I read your article about energy from the following web site:
http://www.phy6.org /stargaze/Senergy.htm
and have a question.  Is kinetic energy available to do work later?
Reply
It depends.  Kinetic energy is all too easily converted to heat by friction, and if this is allowed to happen, that energy is rarely recoverable.  However, if you can convert it to another form, you can extract at least some useful work from it (there is always some friction loss).  Examples:
You zoom on your bicycle down a valley and gain kinetic energy.  That energy can help you rise again on the upslope on the other side. Rising against gravity is doing work.
Your car has to stop at a red traffic light.  If it is an ordinary car, you press the brake pedal, which pushes brake pads against wheel disks or drums. Friction converts the kinetic energy into heating of the disks or drums, but you can hardly convert that to work.
If however your car is of the new "hybrid" type with electric motors on the wheels (like the Toyota "Prius" or the Honda hybrid), by braking you connect the motors to the car's batteries. The motors act as generators and charge the batteries, turning your kinetic energy into chemical energy of the battery, which can be reused.
The space shuttle in orbit has a tremendous kinetic energy. Upon re-entry, its orbit is nudged into the atmosphere, the shuttle turns so the underside of its wings (covered with heat tiles) faces forward, and air resistance, helped by a shock, converts the energy into heating the air. Not much can be done with that.
If however you link the shuttle to a conducting tether, as was done once (with some problems), the motion of the tether across the Earth's magnetic field lines creates a voltage, which may be tapped, e.g. for charging batteries.  See
http://www.phy6.org/Education/wtether.html
.
Accelerators of high-energy particles used to depend on pulsed magnets.  I remember visiting one such accelerator around 1960, the "Cosmotron" in Brookhaven, Long Island.  Its magnet needed a large electric current, which created a great amount of magnetic energy. It made little sense to waste that energy every time the magnetic field was allowed to decay.
The solution was a large flywheel, connected to the generator providing the current. When the current decreased, the generator acted as a motor (a bit like that of the hybrid car) and spun up a flywheel weighing a few tons.  The next cycle, the flywheel provided most of the energy for generating the magnet's current, slowing down again; only a little extra power was needed to make good friction losses.  Thus the energy bounced back and forth between magnetic and kinetic.
Someone pointed out to me that the way the flywheel rotated was carefully chosen.  In case the flywheel's bearings somehow gave way, its rotation was such that it would roll through the wall of the building and out into the field--not in the opposite direction, which would have brought it into the crowded accelerator hall.
I hope you get the idea by now.
122.   Does any location get the same number of sunshine hours per year?
Is the period of light and dark the same for every place on earth over
 the course of a year? Example: Do Nome, AK and Rome, Italy get the same
 number of hours of light and dark per year (ignoring intensity
differences).
Big question in our family recently!!
Thank You !!
Reply
A good question--and congratulations for having a family with such
 wide-ranging interests! Intuition seems to say "yes", but the challenge
 is to demonstrate it without any calculations. Below is one try.
Certain approximations are necessary. You ignore the actual size of the
 Sun's disk--but count as "light" times when the center of the Sun is above the horizon and as "dark" times when it is below the horizon.  Also we ignore the ellipticity of
 the Earth's orbit, which causes the speed of the Earth's motion around the Sun to vary,
 but assume that it moves at constant speed. (About that variation, see
Skepl2A.htm
.
With those assumptions the Sun, too, seems to move with constant speed around the
 ecliptic over the course of the year. For the purpose of deriving average sunshine over the year, we can therefore replace it by an "average Sun" spread out evenly around the ecliptic.
 The question then becomes does this "average Sun" give equal hours of
 light and darkness to any point one Earth.
Assume first that the Earth DOES NOT rotate, so that your
 position--Rome, Nome or Pennsylvania--does not move. Your view from that
 location is then determined by your horizon, which in turn is determined
 by the plane tangential to the surface of Earth wherever you stand. You
 can call this "the plane of the horizon." Anything above that
 plane--exactly half the celestial sphere--is visible, anything below it
 is not. (It may be useful for you at this point to fetch paper and pen.)
The plane of the horizon cuts the plane of the ecliptic along SOME line
 of intersection, passing through wherever YOU are standing. In the plane
 of the ecliptic, the "average Sun" is a circle around your position, and
 any line through its center (=your place) is a diameter. This includes
 the above line of intersection. That line therefore cuts the "average
 Sun" into two equal halves--one above the horizon (which you see), the
 other below the horizon (which you don't see).
Over the year the Sun occupies equally every little bit of the circle.
 So half the time you see it, half you don't.
But the Earth rotates, you say. True, and this causes you to occupy not
 one position on the sphere representing the Earth, but many--an entire
 circle around the axis. But ANY point on that trip (performed daily)
 obeys the "half-and-half" rule. So it also holds for any place on the
 rotating Earth.
123.   Speed of toy car rolling off an inclined ramp
This is my first time doing this.  I am eleven years old and I have a science project that I need some help on.  My dad built me a ramp for model cars.  I want to prove that the speed of a car is determined by the weight of a car.  I think that the lighter the car the faster it will go down the ramp.  How do I prove this?  Is there a formula?  Please help me.
Reply
You are up against something very fundamental, something I hope you will remember in high school, when you study physics.
Every object has a WEIGHT, the force by which gravity pulls it down.  A big stone has more weight than a small one.  Weight is one way of measuring the amount of material in the stone, or its "mass." A big stone has much more mass than a small one.
However, if you drop them together, you will find that they fall equally fast!! This is, because each object also resists motion, and the resistance (called "inertia") is ALSO proportional to mass.  That is why on a horizontal surface it takes much more force to get a bowling ball rolling than a tennis ball. The motion is horizontal, gravity is not too much involved, but the bowling ball has more mass and therefore much more resistance to being set in motion.
Say the big stone has 10 times the mass of the small one.  It also has 10 times the inertia, and that inertia does not allow it to move any faster, even when the Earth pulls it down 10 times as strongly.
Model cars on a ramp (I suppose they are moved by gravity, like soap-box racers)  obey the same rules.  A heavy car is pulled more strongly, but also has more inertia, so the two should roll at the same speed. Try it! Put two toy cars--big and small--together on a slanting board, and let go.  All other things being equal, they should move together.
To make the car roll faster, the only thing you can do is reduce friction (and at very high speed, air resistance).   A car with well-oiled axles may move faster. Try it!
124.   Acceleration due to gravity
I am a high school  physics student.  My class was given a bonus assignment for the internet and I have yet to find an answer. I was wondering if you could help.
I know that the acceleration due to gravity on the earth is ~ 9.8 m/sec^2, but the class was asked to find a website that listed values of acceleration due to gravity at different locations on the Earth including acceleration due to gravity at our high school, Clarion-Limestone High School in Strattanville, PA. My question is:
What are values of acceleration due to gravity at different locations on Earth and what is the value closest to my school?
If you could help me out because I am really interested in finding out the answer, I would be greatly appreciative.
Reply
Have you just tried to ask Google or Yahoo for links concerned with "Acceleration of Free Fall"?  I did so and got many leads
I am not really supposed to do your work--but look at
http://www.haverford.edu/educ/knight-booklet/accelarator.htm
   Actually, the interesting questions are not "what is the number" but "why does gravity vary from place to place?" and "how do we know?"
It varies because the Earth rotates, adding a centrifugal force to the forces felt locally.  That does two things: it makes the Earth bulge at the equator, so that points there are more distant from the center of Earth.  And it adds there a force opposing gravity, so that the acceleration is smaller. Newton proposed that around 1690.
The process was experimentally studied by comparing the time kept by pendulum clocks
("grandfather clocks") at different locations. The period of the pendulum depends on gravity, and a clock which keeps correct time in Pennsylvania will probably run slow at the equator.
Response
Thank you for the additional information on gravity.  I actually did look at Google acceleration due to gravity but I guess I didn't look fully enough.
You actually were a great help for me.  You explained the subject better than my teacher.  I hope you continue this because physics and other sciences really interest me.
Go to main list of questions
(by topic)
Back to the Master List
Timeline
Glossary
Math index
Author and Curator:
Dr. David P. Stern
Mail to Dr.Stern:
stargaze
("at" symbol)
phy6.org
.
Last updated 9-17-2004   Edited 1 November 2016